Add "Deploy wasmCloud on AKS article" (#85)
MicrosoftDocs/azure-aks-docs: articles/aks/wasmcloud.md

---

> title: Use wasmCloud on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)

Reviewer: Just to be consistent with SpinKube article: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/deploy-spinkube

I would suggest the title to be "Deploy wasmCloud to Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) to run distributed WebAssembly (Wasm) workloads"

> description: Learn how to deploy and use wasmCloud on an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster to deploy distributed Web Assembly applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to deploy and use wasmCloud on an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster to deploy distributed WebAssembly applications.
```
~nit

author: protochron
ms.topic: article
ms.date: 11/07/2024
---

> # Use wasmCloud on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Deploy wasmCloud to Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) to run distributed WebAssembly (Wasm) workloads
```

> 

Reviewer: Add a paragraph describing what WebAssembly Components are

[wasmCloud][wasmcloud] is a CNCF project designed to fast-track the development, deployment and orchestration of WebAssembly components. This document details instructions on how to deploy wasmCloud on an Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) cluster.

> 

Reviewer: Describe what are the benefits of running WebAssembly workloads compare with container workloads

## Before you begin

* This article assumes a basic understanding of Kubernetes concepts. For more information, see [Kubernetes core concepts for Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)](./concepts-clusters-workloads.md).
* You need an active Azure subscription. If you don't have one, create a [free account](https://azure.microsoft.com/free/) before you begin.
* You need an AKS cluster. If you don't have an existing cluster, you can create one using the [Azure CLI](./learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-cli.md), [Azure PowerShell](./learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-powershell.md), or [Azure portal](./learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-portal.md).
* You need to install the wasmCloud CLI (wash). For installation options, see [wasmcloud-cli][wasmcloud-cli].

> 

Reviewer: Specify the versions for tools like `wash`

> 

Reviewer: Describe "## Limitations"

## Deploy wasmCloud

To deploy wasmCloud on an AKS cluster, you will need to install the all in one Helm chart into your cluster. This installs the following services into a single namespace:
* [NATS]: NATS provides the backbone for all communication between components in wasmCloud.
* [wadm] -- the wasmCloud Application Manager, otherwise known as wadm is the orchestrator for managing applications running on top of wasmCloud.
* [the wasmCloud Operator][wasmcloud-operator] -- the wasmCloud Operator is a Kubernetes operator that manages the lifecycle of wasmCloud hosts.

We recommend deploying wasmCloud into a dedicated Kubernetes namespace.

1.  Create a namespace for wasmCloud using `kubectl`:

    ```
    kubectl create namespace wasmcloud
    ```
2. Install NATS and wadm into the wasmCloud namespace using the `helm upgrade` command:

    ```azurecli-interactive
    # By default, the chart installs NATS, Wadm, and wasmCloud Operator subcharts
     helm upgrade --install \
          wasmcloud-platform \

>           --values https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud/main/charts/wasmcloud-platform/values.yaml \

Reviewer: Consider use a tagged version instead of "main"

    kubectl get pod -l app.kubernetes.io/instance=wasmcloud-host
    ```

    Your output should look similar to the following:

    ```output
    NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
wasmcloud-host-f9d67b8cf-lvsq6   2/2     Running   0          84s
    ```

6. Verify that you can connect to the wasmCloud host using `wash`:

    In a separate shell use run the following command to port forward to one of the running NATS pods:

    ```azurecli-interactive
    kubectl port-forward nats-0 4222
    ```
    This forwards all traffic on port 4222 locally to the NATS pod running in your cluster. You must have this port forwarded in order to connect to wasmCloud using `wash`.

    In your original shell, run the following command with `wash` to verify that your wasmCloud host is running:

    ```azurecli-interactive
    wash get hosts
    ```

    Your output should look similar to the following:

    ```output
      Host ID                                                      Friendly name           Uptime (seconds)
  ND2G4FRXLBCV3YL52OD4NRSS66Z5YOR3JOSL3Q7T5I6ZJM4EII3Y73CZ     frosty-resonance-6227   312
    ```

## Deploy a wasmCloud application

> Now that you have wasmCloud running on your AKS cluster, you can deploy a wasmCloud application. A wasmCloud application is a collection of WebAssembly modules that are orchestrated by the wasmCloud Application Manager (wadm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have wasmCloud running on your AKS cluster, you can deploy a wasmCloud application. A wasmCloud application is a collection of WebAssembly components that are orchestrated by the wasmCloud Application Manager (wadm).
```

~maybe?

    ```

    Your output should look similar to the following:

    ```output
    Name                                         Kind           Status
    http_component                               SpreadScaler   Deployed
    httpserver -(wasi:http)-> http_component     LinkScaler     Deployed
    httpserver                                   SpreadScaler   Deployed
    ```

    Repeat this command if necessary until all components are in the `Deployed` state.

4. Invoke the http component using `curl` and `kubectl port-forward`:

    In a separate shell, run the following command to port forward to the `hello-world` application

    ```azurecli-interactive
    kubectl port-forward port-forward deployment/wasmcloud-host 8080
    ```

    This forwards all traffic on port 8080 locally to the wasmCloud host running in your cluster. You must have this port forwarded in order to connect to wasmCloud using `curl`.

    In your original shell, run the following command to invoke the http component:

    ```azurecli-interactive
    curl http://localhost:8080
    ```

    Your output should look similar to the following:

    ```output
    Hello from Rust!
    ```

> 

Reviewer: Add a section to clean up the resources

## Next steps

> You can continue to learn by following the [wasmCloud Quickstart Guide][wasmcloud-quickstart], which walks you though creating a Web Assembly component from scratch, using using different wasmCloud capabilities and scaling your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can continue to learn by following the [wasmCloud Quickstart Guide][wasmcloud-quickstart], which walks you though creating a WebAssembly component from scratch, using using different wasmCloud capabilities and scaling your application.
```

~nit
